Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Jason Clark. He is
a lecturer in psychology in the university, in the
School of Human and Social Sciences at the University
of West London. And today we're talking about his
book Constructing Experience, Expectation and Attention in Perception. So
Doctor Clark, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. It's a pleasure to be on.
I've watched lots of your, uh, episodes and podcasts
with lots of really interesting people and and they're
very stimulating, so it's great to be part of
that now. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you so much. So tell us
first about the predictive processing framework and how the
brain is a predictive machine.
Yeah, great. OK. I think maybe the best way
into this is to think about what the brain
is, uh, where it is and what the world
is, right? So, you know, human beings got brains,
they're encased in these bony skulls, and these brains
are fed sensory information through various channels, through visual
channels, through Um, auditory channels through the skin, etc.
ALL this sensory information coming into the body and
into the nervous system and into the brain. But
there's a fundamental problem that the brain has, right?
The brain is this, uh, you know, 80 billion
or so massive cells inside the skull. And from
within that kind of closed skull, it has to
somehow Understand the world beyond it, right? So, uh,
and if it doesn't do that, then it's gonna
pretty much die very quickly. So, it, it, so,
in order to do that, the brain, it seems,
from theory, builds this kind of internal model of
what it thinks. And again, I use it thinks,
it's not thinking in the sense that it's consciously
thinking this, but what is it, what it, what
it's inferring the outside world to be. In other
words, what it's inferring the Causes of the sensory,
uh, the, the, the, uh, outside world impinging on
the senses, it kind of infers what the causes
of those are. And that's our brain's kind of
world model, what it believes is happening around us
now in terms of, you know, sound and smell
and taste and touch and objects, that kind of
thing. So, in other words, it's a kind of
simulation. Of what it thinks the world is. And
we are living inside that sim simulation. So the
predictive brain hypothesis is basically saying that that's what
the brain is doing. It's, um, given these limitations,
given that it is in this situation where it
doesn't have You know, it can't step out of
outside of itself to see what the world is
really like. It has to use the evidence provided
by the senses to build up this model of
what it thinks the world is. So, what it
does is it uses, uh, predictions, learned from past
experience, uh, plus this sensory information coming in to
build this model. And the model is constantly refined,
so the brain is constantly learning. Because sometimes the
model makes mistakes, it gets things wrong, and then
it can correct those mistakes, uh, via the information
coming through the sensory channels which serve as prediction
errors. So they, um, if the model contradicts what's
coming in through the senses, then the model updates.
And this is what we call prediction error minimization.
And the, uh, the aim of the brain, I
suppose, again, using, you know, uh, Perhaps not, I
shouldn't use the aim, but the, it seems the
function of the brain is to kind of build
this model that enables us to kind of survive,
enables us to, uh, maintain our existence despite, you
know, the, uh, you know, the kind of second
law of thermodynamics entropy trying to kind of break
us down. We're trying to resist that. Um, ANYWAY,
so that's what, uh, the predictive brain is, and
it's been, um, you know, uh, Uh, written about
by people like Karl Friston and Andy Clark and
Jacob Howie and Anil Seth among many, many others.
Um, YEAH, so that's, that's, that's what the predictive
brain is.
So tell us a little bit more about the
prediction errors you mentioned there. How are they generated
and how are they minimized?
Yeah, good. So, when we look at the world,
let me think of an example. So when we
look at the world, um, and let's say we
are. I can't think of an example, in a
park, and maybe, uh, so when we're in the
park, we have a lot of expectations about what
we're going to see in the park. So our
brain already kind of expects to see certain things
in the park. So we walk in the park
and let's say we see a flash of white
fur somewhere in the distance. And this is Highly
ambiguous because that flash of white texture could have
come from many different objects in the world. So,
it could be a fur coat, it could be
a dog, it could be a polar bear, it
could be many different things. And so, when you
come into the park, maybe you have, because of
this world model of parks, you have the expectation
that you're going to see dogs, that kind of
thing in the park. So when you see this
flash of white texture, Uh, you. Uh, YOU predict
that this is, uh, a dog. But maybe when
you get a bit closer, uh, You realize that
it's not a dog, maybe there are some features
of that creature that don't fit with your dog
hypothesis, and you have to revise your hypothesis. So
now you realize, oh my God, it is a
polar bear, and what the hell is a polar
bear doing in the park? So it's highly surprising,
but this, uh, the fact that it is a
polar bear and that the features don't match the
model of the dog that you have, these serve
as prediction errors, and these serve to update your
model of what's going on in the world. And
And the aim, I suppose, is for the brain
to minimize these prediction errors so that it gets
this, you know, the best model of the world
that it can given its epistemic situation of being
inside this bony skull. Um, SO yeah, that's, uh,
so prediction errors are what serve to update the
model. So we have the model, which is our
brain's best interpretation of what's going on. Uh, AND
information comes in through the senses. This information can
either align with the model, in which case there
is no error. Or it can misalign with the
model and, in which case it is, uh, uh,
it's, it doesn't align with the, the prediction, so
it's called a prediction error, and in which case,
then we update the, the brain would update the
model or the system would update the model, yeah.
And this model you are referring to is what
is called the generative model, correct?
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. So, the generative model is our
brain's, uh, world model, right? To unpack that, that
means, uh, that we can think of it in
terms of a hierarchy of predictions, going from very
abstract levels to predictions about, so. Abstract levels, such
as time flows or space is three dimensional, or
objects, uh, can't exist, you know, two objects can't
exist in one place at the same time, or
light comes from above. These are beliefs, predictions that
we have that are, if not hardwired, they're very,
uh, we learn them very quickly and they become
a real framework for how we understand the world
and how we perceive the world. Uh, SO they're
abstract, um, predictions. And then you come further down
in the hierarchy, you get to predictions about objects
in the world, um, you know, and then you
come further down in the hierarchy and you're getting
to the features of, of the world, the colors,
the motion, the textures, the, uh, edges of objects,
etc. And the idea is that, um, there's this
hierarchy of these cascading predictions from abstract through to
sensory level predictions, and that's our world model. That's
how we currently Perceive the world, think of the
world, understand the world, but that is constrained by
these, by the sens sensory information coming into the
senses, which if it conflicts with the model, then
the model can be updated by these prediction errors.
Yeah.
OK, so let me ask you now, yes, you're
going to say something.
No, I was gonna say, so that, yeah, that
is the generative model. It's, uh, you know, in
kind of simple terms, it's the, the, the model,
it's a kind of reality model, and I'm, I'm,
I'm kind of, uh, kind of taking that from
a recent paper by, uh, Lauanan, uh, Chandari and
Friston called A Beautiful Leap Theory of Consciousness, which
what I say is a really interesting, uh, paper.
Um, BUT yeah, it's a reality model. It's our,
it's, it's what we're living now. This is reality.
This experience is my reality and, and current neuroscience,
the predictive brain, predictive processing theory says that, uh,
underlying this experience of reality I have is this,
uh, hierarchical cascading, uh, system of predictions, which are
shaped by prediction errors.
So in the book you also talk about consciousness
and we're going to explore here how consciousness might
be linked to perception or how it is linked
to perception. So first of all, what is consciousness?
How do you approach it?
Yeah, good question. So, OK, um, well, I think
first, um, in the literature. Uh, IT'S typically spoken
of in terms of what is called phenomenal consciousness
and what is called access consciousness. So just to
briefly explain what those two terms mean. So, Um
So phenomenal consciousness is the Uh, subjective experience of
what it's like to be me now, right? So,
uh, philosopher Thomas Nagel wrote a paper, I think
in 1974 called What, what is it like to
be a bat, and he gave, uh, kind of
Definition, I suppose, of consciousness that is kind of,
that most people kind of adhere to, because it
seems to make intuitive sense, which is a system
is conscious that there's something, if there is something
that's, it is like to be that system. So,
this system is something it's like to be this
system. I don't think there's anything like it's like
to be this system. Um, So, if there's something
that's like to be a system, then it's conscious.
So phenomenal consciousness is, uh, the qualitative experience of
redness, for example, or the felt experience of pain
before you even think about it. It's just that
experience or if you drink coffee, the kind of
taste of coffee, or, uh, I don't know, the
smell of a rose or the sound of a,
you know, harmonies being played on the piano, that
qualitative. Thing that we can't quite grasp in physical
terms, that's what we mean by phenomenal consciousness. So,
I, so that's one part of what consciousness is
in the literature. The other is access consciousness, and
the two are related, and I'll talk about that
in a second, but access consciousness. Is more related
to, uh, function and behavior. So access consciousness, I
mean, you can, you know, we can see how
we could easily kind of build that really, not
easily, but you could see how you could build
that into, uh, you know, an AI or into,
you know, some other system. But access consciousness is
what Sort of consciousness does, right? So, if we're
conscious, we report, I see an apple in front
of me, or we pay attention, or we integrate
information, or, uh, if we're conscious of something, it
makes it available to all lots of other decision
making, memory systems, um. So all of that access
consciousness, we can, you know, study in, you know,
functional physical term, using functional and physical terms, and,
uh, that all makes sense. And I think there
have been lots of efforts to kind of, uh,
At least kind of develop theories, uh, where, um,
of access consciousness. Um, BUT they're kind of. The
problem in science, the hard problem, uh, which, the
hard problem, which was, uh, first coined, I think,
by David Chalmers in his book, The Conscious Mind,
maybe just before, in a paper just before, uh,
which is, um, you know, OK, maybe we can
understand how brains can be access conscious, how they
can attend, how they can report, how they can
integrate information, how they can make that information available
for decision making, for memory, um, And Theories like
the global workspace theory by Dehane. And, uh, and,
uh, I think Nkash, um. Kind of our, our
the, I think our theories of access consciousness, right?
But the, the, the problem is this phenomenal consciousness
is what it's like to be that we experience,
um, explain that in terms of. Neural activity, physical
information processing, uh, it's that that is a hard
problem to solve, yeah. So, uh, yeah, I hope
I answered your question. So yes, we think, uh,
in terms of what I think, what I think
consciousness is. Um, I mean, I, I, I'm a
bit of a maverick, I suppose. I kind of,
I, I don't, I, I, you know, I've been
thinking for a long time about how physical processes
can give rise to qualitative experience and like many
people, I find myself kind of unable to. You
know, this is a it's called the explanatory gap.
We have all of neuroscience and information processing and
all this whir of information processing in the brain,
all these predictions, all this stuff going on, but,
you know. We don't seem to be able to
from that, uh, get, de juice, explain why this
phenomenal consciousness exists, this what it's like to be.
That's, that is the big, big problem. Yeah, yeah.
Right, and how are the contents of consciousness studied?
Yes, that's a, yeah, that's a really good question.
So, I think, um, a kind of way into
studying consciousness is to, and this was developed by
Bernard Bars, is to create situations as an experimentalist.
I'm an experimental psychologist, to create situations where you
can manipulate whether somebody is conscious of something. Not
conscious of something, right? So, you get a situation
where under one condition, they're conscious of a stimulus,
and in another condition, they're not conscious of the
stimulus. And that allows you to kind of tease
apart, uh, brain processes that are associated just with
Uh, you know, processing the stimulus on the screen
without consciousness and processes that are involved with also
with, uh, you know. Processing the stimulus on the
screen and being conscious of it. So, it gives
you a way to kind of study those two
things. And so this is, this is called the
contrastive method. So you're contrasting situations, conditions where participants
are, um, aware of the stimulus and situations where
they're not aware of the stimulus. And a few
examples of that, I suppose, are, um, for example,
um, There are lots of examples. So binocular rivalry,
for example. So, uh, binocular rivalry is the, uh,
phenomenon where. Um, Uh, AGAIN, the participant is presented
with one image to one eye, say, a house,
and one image to another eye, say, uh, a
face. And, I mean, in typical, um, perception, we
are, we, you know, have one image on this
side and one image on this side, but they're
just slightly different, and these depth mechanisms kind of
combine them and give, give us a sense of
3D depth. Uh, BUT when the, when the two
images are, Uh, not congruent. So when there's a
house and on one eye, and there's a face
on one eye, then what happens is Uh, what's
called binocular rivalry, which is where the perception that
the, uh, participant has kind of vacillates between seeing
a house and then seeing a face. Sometimes a
kind of mixture of the two, but it kind
of ultimately seems to kind of rest on house
or face. Um, And so that's one method we
can use to study consciousness because it allows us
to see, uh, what's going on in the brain
in the brain when the participant is conscious of
seeing the house or the face, let's say, and
what's going on in the brain when they're not
conscious of seeing the house or the face. And
so therefore you can kind of tease the two
apart, right? Um, ANOTHER method is, um, Uh, um,
I think. So I don't want to talk about
inattentional blindness because I think we're going to be
talking about intentional blindness in a bit, but yeah,
but just very briefly, inattentional blindness is a way
to study consciousness because, um, so inattentional blindness is
the phenomenon where participants fail to report, uh, an
object that's directly where they're looking at on the
screen in most situations when their attention is not
on that stimulus, that object on the screen, they
miss it. And this is called. Uh, INATTENTIONAL blindness
and been thoroughly explored, uh, kind of initially by
Arrian Mack at the New School and Urban Rock,
who I think was at Berkeley at the time.
And, um, So, using an attentional bli blindness, we
can, and so if they're not attending to the
stimulus, they won't, invariably won't notice it's there. They're
not conscious of it. But if they are attending
to the stimulus, then they are aware that it's
there. They're conscious of it. So, we have a
situation where we have a situation where the participant
is not conscious of the stimulus, and in the
full attention, they are conscious of the stimulus. There's
lots of stuff you can do there to see,
you know, what's going on in the brain, for
example, when they are conscious of the stimulus versus
what's going on when they're not. And that allows
you to see, ah, this, this, uh, neural activity
or this, uh, information processing, this is associated with
them consciously seeing it. And again, that gives you
a kind of grip on what's going on in
the brain when they're, Actually conscious of it versus
when they're not.
OK, so let me get now into the topic
of perception and attention. So starting with perception, what
is perception and tell us about top down and
bottom up theories of perception.
Yeah, good. So, um, perception, um, I would say
is our brains, uh, Kind of best guess about
what's going on, right? Um, IT is our. As
I said earlier, our internal model of what we
think is going on beyond our bodies and inside
our bodies. And it is, um, You know, not
just visual, so there's visual perception. So visual perception
would include seeing colors, seeing shapes, seeing motion, seeing
objects, seeing visual scenes, auditory perception, hearing sounds, hearing
trumpets, um, tactile perception, so feeling velvet, feeling, uh,
uh, wood, for example, feeling sandpaper. So again, this
is our internal model of. The world. Our best
guess is, again, I'm kind of speaking through a
kind of predictive processing framework, but our kind of
best guess as to what the world is, um,
and our perception is informed by our assumptions about
the world, our predictions about the world, our best
guesses about the world, but these are kind of
reined in by the sensory information that's coming in
through the senses. So, Uh, perception is our, our
model of the world, but it's tethered to the
senses. So we don't kind of lose touch with
reality, let's say. And I think that, you know,
again, we can talk about this a bit later,
but I think, um, Perception can be untethered to
reality. So, when you're asleep, for example, and you,
and you dream, so you're still experiencing then, but
this is experience kind of more or less untethered
from the sensory, uh, you know, receptors. Um, SO
the brain is kind of, uh, you know, making
up its own story without being reined in by
the world, by the information coming in through the
senses. Um, SO yeah, that's what I think perception
is, yeah. Oh, and, and then, so what was
your second question? Yeah, and, and then top-down and
bottom-up processing,
yeah, yeah, yeah, top-down and bottom-up theories of perception.
Yeah, good. So, um. So When we're talking about
perception, we're talking about, uh, our brain's understanding of
the world. And this understanding. Can come from the
world. In other words, it can come through the
sensory information channels, in the case of, you know,
light or, or or sound or, um. But also,
as I said before, the brain has this internal
model of the world. So, We talk about two
kinds of processes going on there. We talk about
bottom-up processes and top-down processes. So, roughly speaking, bottom-up
processes refers to the information coming in through the
senses and kind of traveling, metaphorically speaking, up and
into the brain. And this, this, uh, bottom-up process,
um, involves taking the sensory information. And processing it.
Uh, AND, um, there's a kind of feed forward
sweep of information that comes in. Um, AND some
people have thought that this is enough for the
brain to create perception, right? This bottom-up sweep of
information. But there's also, uh. This, these top-down processes
going on. And what these top-down processes are, are,
again, loosely speaking, um, assumptions, beliefs, uh, expectations that
your brain has about the world. And so, one
of these top-down assumptions might be that light comes
from above, right? And we see this in various
illusions. There's, I can't remember the name of it,
but there's, there's a, an illusion where you have,
uh, circles on the screen and circles, uh, are
either, uh, light at the top and dark at
the bottom. And the circles on the screen that
are light at the top and dark at the
bottom appear phenomenologically to stick out of the screen,
right? Uh, THEY'RE convex, and the circles with, uh,
Dark at the top and light at the bottom
appear to kind of stick into the screen. And
this is kind of puzzling. It's like, you know,
why don't we just see circles on the screen
with dots and lights? Why do we see this
kind of convexity and concavity when it's not there
on the screen and. And one explanation is that,
uh, human beings have lived in an environment for
millennia where the source of light typically is from
the sun from above. So our brains build this
very strong assumption, maybe it's hardwired. I don't think
it's hardwired. I think there are experiments with chicks
that show it can be, uh, altered. But anyway,
but we learned very quickly. And, um, that, uh,
you know, we, um, And that explains why we
see some of the circles are sticking out and
sticking in. We see the, the circles of light
at the top and dark at the bottom is
sticking out, because if there was light coming from
above, it would hit the top of a sticking
out circle just like that. And, uh, and, and
that's how our brain interprets it, um, as a,
as a convex, uh, dimple sticking out of the
screen. That's just one example, but that's an assumption,
again. We're talking about assumptions, top-down processes. The assumption
then is light comes from above, and we kind
of interpret the world through that assumption. That's one
of them. There are many, many, many others. And
so it, so coming back to kind of top-down
and bottom-up processing, so. Current theories of perception show
that perception is a, is an amalgamation of these
processes. um, AND I think that's where, what the
predictive brain, predictive processing, predictive coding, uh, really kind
of mathematicizes, uh, and turns into kind of computational
neuroscience.
Right. So let's get into attention then. First of
all, what is attention?
So Um, attention has, study of attention has a
long history, uh, from at least, uh, William James,
um, until, you know, now and onwards. Um, ATTENTION
has been conceived of as some kind of selection
mechanism in the brain. So We are, you know,
walking around the world, we're constantly being bombarded by,
you know, uh. Information impinging on our sensory epithelia,
and there's far too much of it for our
nervous system to handle. So, uh, uh, um, you
know, imagine if you were in, I don't know,
New York City walking through Times Square, all those
lights, sounds, cars, all the, uh, if you had
to process all of that, you just wouldn't be
able to. So, in order to Um Kind of
solve this problem, I suppose. The brain has developed
this kind of selection strategy where it selects, so
you can think of all that information from your
senses coming in via all these channels, uh, kind
of competing, say, for limited cognitive and neural resources.
And so the idea is attention serves to select
some of these channels, um, give more weight to
some of these channels, and by giving more weight
to them and selecting them, it enables that information
contained in those channels to be processed more deeply,
so you can become conscious of it, you can
make decisions based on it, you can react to
it, you can avoid it. Um. So that's a
kind of um That's, uh, one very influential, I
think, view of what attention is. Um, YOU can
also think of attention, um, uh, metaphorically as a
kind of spotlight, right? That you're kind of, the,
the world is in front of you and you've
got all this information kind of rushing in. And
again, you've only got limited resources to process it.
So, um, So, you know, much as a spotlight
can illuminate a person in an audience, um, bringing
them into view, uh, attention can metaphorically operate like
a spotlight, which selects certain bits of information, um,
to, you know, to process more deeply, um, I
think, um, where I am with attention, and I
think, um, Again, I think where, where the field
is moving in terms of attention is talking about
attention in terms of precision. Um, IN the brain,
which I think would need a lot of unpacking.
Um, SO I don't know if you want to
wait to talk about that later, but, or now,
I'm not sure.
Yeah, tell us about it now.
Yes. Yeah, OK, OK. So again, we go back
to the predictive brain, this, uh, predictive processing, uh,
theory of what brains are doing. Um, And just
to sort of repeat maybe a bit of what
I said, you know, the idea is that there's
this hierarchy of predictions, cascading predictions from abstract predictions
to object-level predictions to sensory-level predictions that are, um,
that's our world model that are being refined by
sensory information that provides, uh, kind of, Learning material
for the models if there's a mismatch between the
sensory information, the model and the model, the model
can update. Now, this whole process, uh, of, uh,
Hierarchical prediction error minimization is shaped also by what
is called precision. Now precision, um, loosely speaking, is
the. Is the confidence. That the system has in
the Prediction error. Right? So, let me give you
an example. So let's say you're in a, a
car and you're driving down the road and it's
a foggy day, right? It's very, very foggy. You've
driven down that road many, many times, but it's
so foggy that you can not really see anything
in front of you. So in that situation, let's
think about what might be going on in the
brain. Again, your brain is making all these predictions
about what's going on right now and what you're
gonna, what's gonna happen in the future. And, um,
And In terms of driving the car, it's making
predictions about the road, about the, you know, the
turns on the road, etc. ETC. But, and in,
in a case of, uh, clear daylight, it would
be able to. Uh Sort of, uh, tune those
predictions by the sensory information that's coming in, uh.
You know, through the car because it's a, it's
a clear, it's a clear day. Now, when it's
foggy, the brain can't rely on sensory information to
guide it. It can, it has to rely on
its, um, on its, uh, model of the world,
right? Your understanding of how the road curves, so
you're using your model to drive your car, right?
Um, SO in this case, you would have High
precision on your prediction errors, sorry, on your predictions,
on your model, and very low precision on the,
uh, sensory information coming in. What that means is
that you would give more confidence in that driving
the car situation to your brain's model of what's
going on. Uh, IN other words, I know this
road, I know there's a curve here. You would
give more confidence to that, more precision to that
than to the sensory information coming in, because the
sensory information is just fog. It's just kind of,
you know, uh, so precision then is. How much
confidence the brain gives to the prediction errors. Versus
the prediction. And attention then under this framework is
precision. It's the confidence the brain gives to either
its predictions or to its prediction errors. So, um,
And, and, and technically, the precision is the, uh,
inverse of the variance, right? So if you think
of, just getting a little bit more technical, so
if you think about, uh, each prediction the brain
is making as a Gaussian, as a normal distribution,
and so there you can get a mean, you
can get a, a, a variance, you can get
a standard deviation, and the, the variance tells you
how spread out that distribution is. And if it's,
um, And then the precision is the inverse of
that variance, which tells you how concentrated, uh, the
distribution is. So if you have a very concentrated
distribution, that is a prediction or a prediction error
with very high precision, right? It's, it's saying to
your brain, look, look, look, this is, this is
worth taking note of. But if it's, um, Very
low precision, uh, so, uh, then the brain might
treat it as noise or something not to be
taken seriously, and maybe it would take more seriously
the the the the world model as it currently
stands. Um, SO precision and, and attention then. So,
Uh, uh, so attention is, is, is precision. Attention
is that the brain's ability to, uh, kind of,
and this is metaphorically, right? So turn up the
volume on certain, uh, sensory information coming in or
turn up the volume on certain predictions you're making,
uh, to kind of control the game, uh, there,
yeah. Mhm.
So you've already mentioned earlier inattentional blindness, but tell
us now more about phenomena like inattentional blindness, change
blindness, and attentional blink, and what we have learned
from the studies on these phenomena you explore in
your book.
Yeah, um, so, um, so we have inattentional blindness,
change blindness, and the attentional blink, uh. What I'll
talk about what they are in a second, but
what they will show, what they all seem to
show, uh, what they all seem to support is
that without attention, Right, you can think of it
as a spotlight if you want to, or as
a selection mechanism or precision, but without attention, we
are functionally blind to what is. Presented to us,
right? Even though our eyes might be looking directly
at an object or a stimulus on a screen,
uh, these, uh, phenomena seem to show that that's
not enough for us to be aware of it.
In order for us to be aware of that
stimulus, we have to be attending to it. So,
overall, they suggest theoretically that attention is necessary for
conscious perception. Um, SO let's talk about each of
those in turn. So inattentional blindness, uh, as I
said before, is this phenomenon where if people are
not paying attention to a stimulus that's in front
of them, uh, invariably, they will not be aware
of it. Um, SO this is typically, so let
me give you one example of an experiment on
inattentional blindness. So, uh, Arrian McAna in 2012 wrote
a paper called Gist Perception Requires Attention. Just perception
is having a perception of just, you know, the
general sense of what's going on. I'm in a
room, uh, there are chairs there, uh, you know,
it's, it's not a, uh, garden, it's a room.
I got the, I've got the gist, the overall
kind of picture of what's going on. And so
we did these experiments, uh, Actually, just backtrack a
little, a little bit, uh, uh, others had found
that, uh, participants could, uh, pick up the, the
gist of a scene if, even if they weren't
paying attention to it. Um, AND for various reasons,
we questioned that study and we did advised our
own study to kind of really test this hypothesis
that they were able to perceive the scene even
without attention. And so what we did was we
had an experiment, uh, just to simplify. There were
3 conditions, uh, 3 levels of the attention, uh,
factor. So we had inattention, and in the inattention
condition, participants were looking at a computer screen and
they were told their task was to report whether
a, a cross like that, a vertical horizontal cross
that appeared very briefly, I think 200 milliseconds on
the screen. Randomly in one of the four quadrants
of the screen, uh, they, their task was to
say which of those arms of the cross was
longer. And the differences between the lengths of the
arms was very small. We wanted to make it
quite difficult to make it attentionally demanding. And, um,
so in the inattention condition, they just paid attention
to the cross task, and I think maybe there
were 10 trials. And then on what we call
the critical trial, Uh, which was the last trial,
uh, in our experiment, a scene appeared, uh, and
it could be a garden, it was a photograph
of a scene, and it could be a garden,
a mountain, a farm, uh, people on a racetrack,
people in an audience, lots of different scenes. And
the question we asked them after that final trial
was, OK, after, after they reported the longer arm
of the cross, did you see anything on that
final trial? And we found that, uh, many, many
people reported, didn't report seeing anything. In other words,
they were. They were not paying attention and they
were blind to it, hence inattentional blindness. Now. You
know, to make sure, so, you know, of course,
we did control, um, experiments. So we also did
this with a divider's attention. So they were asked
to pay attention to the crosses and anything else
they saw on the screen. And here they tended
to. Uh, SOMETIMES report seeing the scene, some of
them did not. And then with full attention where
they were told, forget about the, uh, the crosses,
the cross task, just pay attention to anything else
that appears on the screen. And in this case,
with full attention, they did notice the scene and
could describe accurately. So this, uh, shows us that
without attention, Uh, they are not conscious of what
is, uh, on the screen. Now, just to add
something to that, because I think it's interesting, that
doesn't mean that that information is not being somehow
picked up unconsciously by the system and being processed.
Some experiments have found that even though participants are
not aware of the stimulus, in our case, the
seeing, there is priming. In other words, that they
don't see it, but it facilitates certain kinds of
processing in their brain despite not being registered consciously.
That's an attentional blindness. It's really rich literature on
that, um, and, um, and then we come to
change blindness. So change blindness is a similar phenomenon,
but in change blindness, uh, Uh, a participant is,
well, change blindness is where participants are, uh. Do
not notice, are not consciously aware of big changes
that are happening in a display, in a scene
right in front of their eyes. So, uh, work
by Rensink and colleagues back in the 90s and
much work since then using, um, the, uh, what's
it called? The Flickr paradigm, right? So in this
experimental method, um, uh, the scene is shown on
the screen. And there's a blank, maybe it's shown
for, I don't know, maybe 200 milliseconds, I think.
And then there's a blank interval of like, uh,
100 or so milliseconds. And then the scene appears
again. And then the gray interval appears again. And
so what's happening is the, in the first scene,
uh, we see the first scene, we see the
gray interval. In the second time we see it,
something has been changed. So, uh, something has been
added or removed or colors have been changed, or
something's changed. And the participant, participant's task is to
watch this until this kind of repeated, uh, Uh,
you know, pre-change, interval, uh, post-change until they notice
the change and then press a key. And typically
it takes people many, many, many seconds to notice
this change, even though, you know, it's happening right
in front of their eyes. Um, AND what seems
to be key here, at least, uh, one of
the keys is attention. When they're attending to the
change, studies show. They will see the change. So
if you're, if you're just lucky enough to attend
on, say, the object that's going to be changed,
and And then the gray interval happens and then
the scene pops up, and yeah, hey, Presto, the
object's changed, then you'll notice the change. But unless
you're attending to it, the evidence suggests you will,
will not notice a change. Um, AND then, uh,
we have the attentional blink, which is another phenomenon
that demonstrates, uh, the relationship between attention and conscious
perception. So, with the attentional blink, um, This is
where. This is a, this shows the kind of
temporal effects of attention. So, if a stimulus, let,
let me give you the experiment first and I'll,
I can explain what it means. So, in the,
in the, in the experiment, in a typical experiment,
uh, we have what's called an RSVP paradigm. RSVP
means rapid serial visual presentation. And what the participant
experiences a, is a rapid stream of, you know,
letters or digits that say, appearing to them on
the screen. So in this RSVP what's going on?
Is that, um, let's say, Uh OK, so the
participants' task is to Look at the stream of
information and let's say the stream of information is,
uh, let's say 10 digits. And embedded in the
10 digits is, let's say, two letters, and let's
say each of the letters and digits is presented
for 100 milliseconds. So what the participant will see
is this stream of digits and letters kind of
being presented to them. And the participant's task is
to report the two letters, let's say, that are
embedded in this stream of digits. Uh, NOW what's
found is, um, participants are very good at reporting
the first letter that appears in that stream of
digits, right? And if the second letter comes after
500 500 milliseconds or so after the presentation of
the first digit, the first letter, then participants will
also be aware of the second letter. But, and
this is, this is the interesting point. If the
Um, second letter appears between 200 to 500 milliseconds
after the first letter. Participants will not be aware
of it, invariably. They will not consciously notice it.
Um, AND this phenomenon is called the attentional blink.
And kind of, just as our, when, when our
eyes blink momentarily, we shut out visual information coming
in. Uh, THE idea is that when our attention.
Is processing the first letter in the stream. Um,
This takes up attentional resources to do that, and
if the second letter appears. You know, between 200
to 500 milliseconds after the first letter, then, um,
it will not be. Able to be processed by
attention because attention is still working on processing that
first letter. But if it comes 500 milliseconds after
the first letter, now, uh, we're able to consciously,
uh, perceive it because now attention, now the now
you're not blinking anymore. Now your eyes are open
again, right? Um. So, uh, so these phenomena, inattentional
blindness, change blindness, and the attentional blink, all seem
to point or, or, you know, provide lots of
evidence for the theory that attention is, uh, is
necessary for conscious perception to happen. Um, AND if
attention is not, uh, deployed, then you might think
you are conscious of what you're looking at, but
we suggest that you're not. Um, YEAH.
In what ways can expectation shape perception?
Good, yeah. So, um, so we've spoken about attention.
Uh, EXPECTATION has a very, uh, powerful, uh, impact
on what we experience. Um, I'm a vision scientist,
so I mostly speak about visual examples. Um, BUT.
I mean, just thinking about um. Let's say visual
illusions and. There is, uh, for example, there's an
illusion called the, um, the, um, what they're called
illusory contours, and There's a very famous one of
these called the Konitza Triangle. And the Kunitza Triangle,
to explain it without showing it, but anyway, so
what you see on the screen, what's literally given
to you on the screen. Is, uh, 3 little
Pac-Men, black Pac-Man shapes that are kind of oriented
such that. The brain perceives literally a triangle. Uh,
THE outlines of a triangle, the edges of the
triangle, the triangle looks to be a kind of
bright, brighter than. The background on which it sits,
right? So we have this phenomenal experience of a
triangle there. And there's no triangle on the screen.
It's just these three Pac-Man shapes. There's no triangle
there. There's no background that's brighter than an object.
That triangle that we experience is, is, you know,
created by our, our nervous system in response to
that stimulus. Now, I think this shows one of
the, this, this kind of illustrates the effects of
expectation on vision. Um, SO. If your brain is
faced with some stimulus like that, those three Pac-Men
whose configuration kind of suggests a triangle there, then.
Based on past experience and assumptions, the brain has
picked up over, you know, the years we've been
alive, um, it concludes, comes to the conclusion that,
uh, there really is a triangle there, and that's
what we, you know, actually perceive. It's not that
we kind of think, oh, it looks as if
there's a triangle there, we actually perceive a kind
of ghostly triangle. So, this is, uh, one example,
perhaps not the best. Example of where expectations our
brain has about the world, predictions our brain has
about the world kind of override in a way
the evidence right in front of our eyes, which
is there's these three black shapes on a white
screen overrides that. That actuality and creates its own
kind of, uh, kind of guess as to what's
out there in the world. Um, SO, um, expectations
then are these predictions that our brain has based
on past experience of what, what the world is.
So, we expect, uh, when we go into a
doctor's office for there to be certain things and
certain kinds of behavior and, you know, in psychology,
we call it these schemas. We have these kind
of schemas for what to expect. We go to
certain places, how to behave, etc. Um. And In
terms of what's going on in in In the
brain. Um, THERE'S a lot of really interesting research.
Um, I'm thinking particularly of the research that's done
by, uh, Peter Kock at UCL. Um, WHERE he
showed that, um. Areas I think in V1. Uh
Light up in anticipation of a stimulus that's about
to be presented. In other words, the brain is
kind of predicting the stimulus before it even appears.
It's in other words, it's expecting the stimulus before
before it even appears. Um, SO, I mean, that's
the way to think about it in kind of
terms of the brain. Um, BUT I think, uh,
sorry, um, yeah, expectations pervade everything. They literally shape
our reality, what we see. We don't, I don't
think, well, we don't. We don't see reality as
it is because again, we are our brain's model
of what it thinks is going on in the
world, uh, and that model can be wrong, um,
But, uh, and this model is. Uh, DEEPLY sculpted
and shaped by what we expect to be in
the world. Um, AND I mean, again, you know,
this, you know, you can apply this to. Um,
YOU know, Many different things. For example, feelings of
depression or anxiety. I mean, if you have, if
your brain has the prediction that the world is,
uh, gray and, and flat and boring and, you
know, uncaring, then. Again, if you, if your brain
kind of holds that belief deeply enough, you literally
see the world through that. Belief, your world model
is kind of shaped by that belief. So you
probably will see things as being quite gray and,
and, uh. You know, so, uh, anyway, so it
can, it, it's the point of bringing that in
is to show that it's not just some kind
of theoretical thing. It really does apply to human
experience and how we live. Um, SO it really
does have lots of applications there. But yeah, so
that's just a, I mean, there's lots you could
say about expectations, but that's. A few, there are
a few things you could say, yeah.
Uh, TELL us a little bit more about expectation
can lead to illusory experiences.
Yeah, so. So we did, we, so I say
recently, this is back in 2018, but um. We,
so I was talking about Arian Mack, myself, uh,
Muge Errol, and a couple of other people who
were in our lab at the time, um. We're
doing some research on. INATTENTIONAL blindness. And We, um,
I, I'm wondering about how much detail to go
into here because it's, but anyway, um, we were,
uh, Wondering whether iconic memory required attention. Now just
very briefly, iconic memory is a very highly transient
but high capacity sensory memory, uh, that the system
has of what it's just looked at in the
case of vision. So we open our eyes, uh,
we look at the world, an iconic memory, roughly
speaking, is a kind of fleeting, kind of high
capacity memory of what we just saw, right? Um,
AND people have stared. Lots of people, lots of
researchers have said, uh, that, that attention is not
necessary for this iconic memory. And this is particularly
interesting because iconic memory has been equated with phenomenal
consciousness by many people. And so the contents of
iconic memory are equated with what we were conscious
of at that moment by many people. And And
so we wanted to know whether that required attention.
So what we did was we did an inattentional
blindness experiment where, uh, we had, let's say, the
cross task, so which arm of the cross is
longer. And this time on every trial, we had
a matrix of letters at the center of the
screen. Um, AND I think it was a 3
by 3 grid of letters. And, uh, this was
present on every trial. So the participants' task was
to report the longer arm of the cross. And
they did this over repeated trials. And on the
final critical trial, The matrix of letters, the grid
was absent. There was nothing on the screen apart
from the crosses, and participants were asked, OK, what
was the longer run of the cross? And then
they were asked, uh, uh, what else did you
see on the screen? And surprisingly to us, we
were very surprised by this. I looked, some people
reported seeing letters, even though there were no letters
on the screen, right? And they even wrote down
some of the letters that they saw. And, and
then we had a control condition where there was
full attention to the grid of letters and then
on that critical trial, you know, nobody reported seeing
letters. So without attention, they reported seeing the letters,
but with attention, uh, they didn't report seeing the
letters. So this was surprising. So we thought, well,
maybe what's going on is that, um, because the
matrix of letters appears on every trial except the
critical one. Uh, THEIR brains are building up an
expectation that the matrix of letters is going to
appear. And therefore, when it doesn't appear, But when
their attention is, and when their attention is elsewhere,
their brain still has the experience that it's there,
right? Um, AND so this was, you know, really,
uh, surprising and set us off on this, uh,
chain of experiments to explore this. So we looked
at this with color patches. Um, SO, again, using
this inattentional blindness kind of procedure, there was a,
you know, the cross task, and on every trial,
there was a color patch. I, I can't remember
the color, but let's say it was green. And,
um, And then on the critical trial, there was
no color patch. And again, we found that a
significant number of participants reported seeing the color patch
in its absence, it wasn't there. And again, the
control condition, pay attention to the color patch when
they get to the critical trial, it's not there
and they correctly report it's not there. So this,
uh, uh, seemed to suggest to us that expectation
was playing a very powerful role in what people
were experiencing. Again, their brains had come to expect
the color patch, the grid of letters, and When
they were not attending to it, so when there
was not much precision given to that sensory information,
then there was more precision being given to the
prediction, and then that led to them. Maybe hallucinating
a color patch or a grid of letters in
its absence. And then one other, um, experiment we
did following that was the same paradigm, the same
procedure, but this time the stimulus was a face.
And so at the center of the screen on
every non-critical trial was effaced, participant had to report
the long gram of the cross. Actually, in this
task, in, in this, uh, experiment was slightly different.
Um, Rather than the cross task, there were, uh,
on the screen, 4 color bisected circles. So each
circle was red, green, red, green, and they were
either the same configuration or one of them was
not the same configuration as the others. And the
participants' task was to, and again, it was an
intentionally demanding task, that's what we wanted, was to
report whether they were the same or different. And
again, on this, in this experiment, a face appeared
on every trial along with the circles. uh, THEY,
you know, they were never asked about it until
that last trial when the face was absent, it
was not on the screen. And they're asked, did
you see anything on the screen apart from the
circles? And again, a significant number of people reported
seeing a face in its absence. Uh, AGAIN, the
control condition when they were attending to that location,
they reported, you know, there was nothing there, which
was the radical. Um, SO, So, um, So following
on from this then, um, Uh, and again, that's
just some research that I've done in, in my
lab. There are lots of other, there's lots of
other evidence that shows that, um. Uh, AN expectation
can lead to, uh, hall, let's say hall, uh,
uh, uh, an illusory experience, uh, work by, uh,
uh, Arun Bachmann, uh, and others. Um, BUT what
we, but what I've done since then, so, so
one question that we had based on these experiments
was, OK. This is all interesting, but let's just
pause a minute because. On that last trial, where
there is no stimulus, let's talk about the face
experiment. There's no stim, there's no face, but the
participant reports seeing a face after having lots of
trials where there was a face. Now, it could
be that, yeah, maybe they're hallucinating a face, maybe
they are having an experience of the face in
its absence, um, or it could be that they're.
Thinking, well, there was a face on previous trials,
so, uh, maybe there was a face on this
trial. I'll just guess. Yeah, I saw a face,
right? So it could, you know, so it could
be that they're having an illusory experience or it
could be that they're just inferring it. So, currently,
uh, in my lab at the University of West
London, I'm working with my post, uh, so my
PhD student, Becky Tyler, who's doing some really good
work on looking at what's happening in the brain
in terms of, uh, Neural activity, uh, when participants
are reporting seeing the face that's not there on
the screen. And again, just very briefly speaking, um,
there is, uh, There is a I don't want
to get too technical, so, um. So what she's
doing is an ERP study, and an ERP study
is measuring event related potentials, and these are Uh,
this activity in the brain that can be measured
on a millisecond scale that relates to, say, the
onset of a stimulus on the screen or something
else, attention or memory or, uh, a mismatch between
what you see and what you expect to see.
And, One of these, uh, ERPs is called the
N170. And the N170, again, briefly speaking, is, uh,
a, a neural event that occurs 170 milliseconds after
the presentation of the stimulus. Let's say it's a
face, and the end just refers to the kind
of, you know, whether it's a negative wave or
a positive wave. So the N170 is a signature
of, uh, face perception. So when people are perceiving
a face, we get this N170 in the EEG.
And, um, so Becky is currently Doing an experiment
where she's, uh, kind of adapted slightly the paradigm
we use, but she's still asking the question, uh,
you know, does an expectation lead to an illusory
experience of a face in its absence? And we're
predicting that if they really are experiencing the face,
they're not just inferring it, then we should see
this evidence for this 1 N170. Um, SO that's
what we're currently doing. And this allows us to
kind of tease that question apart, right? Are they
really experiencing it or are they just inferring that,
uh, inferring it was there just based on prior
experience, just making a guess. Um, SO. Um If
they really are seeing this face in its absence,
if, if an, this expectation really is leading them
to have, uh, non-veridical conscious experience, in other words,
it's not tethered to the senses, then, um, this
suggests that the, uh, you know, the again, the
power of expectation in creating what we consciously experience,
um, And I've called this phenomenon, uh, expectation awareness,
uh, which is, uh, being aware, having an experience
of something based on your expectations, uh, rather than
what you're attending to. So we, we find evidence
for this expectation awareness under conditions of inattention. So
if somebody is not paying attention to something, but
they have a very strong expectation that something is
going to happen, then this seems to suggest that
they, they experience it. They, their brain kind of
stimulates or, or creates that experience in the absence
of attention based on very strong expectations. Um, So,
uh, yeah. And I've kind of noticed that in
my own life, right? Working on this, just like,
uh, you know, I've got a window here, I've
got a big communal garden out here. And so,
you know, I, I sit at my desk quite
a lot of the time working. And so I
come to predict, you know, there are going to
be dogs, there are going to be people, um,
all kinds of activity. And I noticed sometimes when
I'm kind of working and maybe there's some kind
of a flash of light, some movement in my
peripheral vision, I do kind of very quickly. Kind
of experience it as a dog, right? You know,
I kind of, and then when I shift my
attention quickly, it resolve, you know, that prediction is
shown to be wrong and I see it for
what it is, just the kind of movement of
leaves across the, um, across the, the garden outside.
So, um, yeah, uh, expectations, uh, I mean, we've
known for a long time that expectations play a
strong, um, role in what we perceive, um, going
back to, you know, people like Helmholtz, uh, back
in the 19th century, but I think, um, today
we're really getting a kind of Computational neuroscientific, uh,
account of how these expectations can, um, Influence, yeah,
what we perceive.
Is attention necessary for all kinds of conscious experiences?
Um, SO I would say based on my research,
writing this book and my understanding. That attention is
necessary for conscious perception. Mm. Um, IF we are
not paying attention. We will not be aware of
certain things that are happening around us. Um, And
our brain, you know, we will not be conscious
of them. They will not fit into our world
model at that time. They will not be part
of that world model. Um, And I don't see
any evidence. And I could be wrong because I
might not have looked deeply enough, but I don't
see any evidence in the literature that that shows
that there can be conscious perception without attention. I
think, and I would argue that And I, I
do argue this in the book that in all
cases where it seems that, uh, there's conscious perception
without attention, actually there's some kind of minimal attention
being deployed there. And I think one of the
best Procedures or methods we have to really explore
what we see, what we're conscious of, what we
hear without attention is the inattentional blindness paradigm, because
it allows us to measure. What people perceive when
they're Attending to another stimulus and they're not, they're
not expecting a new stimulus to appear. And, um,
And yeah, I think the weight of evidence really
strongly suggests that conscious perception requires attention. Now, having
said that, I do think that this new evidence
from our own lab and from others' labs. Points
towards, suggests, and then again then there'll needs to
be a lot more work here, but suggests that
under certain conditions, uh, we can have experiences that
are. Um, ILLUSORY, I prefer to use the term
illusory, but we can have experiences that are not
perceptions, so we can hallucinate, we can dream, we
can mine, you know, uh, daydream, etc. AND The
evidence that I've, you know, sort of outlined. Suggests
that not all conscious experiences require attention, right? Expectation,
awareness. If it's true, if it is the case
that these participants really are hallucinating a face in
its absence, and they're not attending to that face,
right? That's really suggestive that, uh, under those conditions,
the participant is having an experience in the absence
of attention. So I think while conscious perception. Does
require attention. I think there's, again, the weight of
evidence strongly suggests that. I think that these new
findings point towards experiences that do not, uh, require
attention. Um. Yeah
So then how do attention and expectation construct perceptual
reality?
Yeah, good. I mean, so if we go back
to this, um, Predictive processing, predictive coding. A way
of looking at things. Uh, It's all precision, right?
Um, SO the idea is that we have this
again, cascading hierarchy of predictions. And The, this cascading
hierarchy of predictions really kind of, uh, encode our
our expectations about the world. That's what the expectation,
that's what expectations are really, these priors, these predictions
that are, uh. That our brain encodes and Again,
we have this feed forward sweep of sensory information
in terms of prediction errors and attention then is
the, the kind of deploying of precision, uh, to
the prediction errors, to the, uh, the predictions. So
we have this, uh, precision weighted prediction error minimization,
right, which basically means that the brain is. Using
expectations and the sensory information and allocating confidence to
some information as opposed to other bits of information,
kind of tuning this, tuning that, and that whole
precision weighted prediction error minimization, uh, is what. Uh,
ATTENTION and expectation are in terms of, uh, and
what conscious what perception is. Uh, YEAH. Yeah.
OK, so I have 2 more questions that have
to do with the implications of how we've been
talking about here today. What are the implications of
this research for scientific theories of consciousness?
Yeah, good question. Um, I think that this, these
findings, what I've called expectation awareness. Present a challenge
to some scientific theories of consciousness. Particularly to those
theories which, uh, again, based on the evidence from
an attentional blindness change, blindness, attentional blink, and other
bits of evidence, uh, show that attention is a
kind of gateway to conscious perception, right? Uh, WE
can have all these incoming signals coming in, uh,
but if they're not attended to, then they don't
get broadcast to the rest of the system. And
I'm thinking here of the global neuronal workspace theory
by, uh, Bars and, uh, and then later De
Hane. Um. And, uh, so, These theories, uh, you
know, Sort of say that attention is necessary for
conscious broadcast, conscious information processing. But if expectation awareness
is true, if, if we can have experiences that
are not, that we're not attending to, um, that,
that shows that this, these theories can't be quite
right because if we, because, you know, um, they,
they kind of challenge those theories, uh, assumptions and,
um, So yeah, so I see this as a
challenge to theories like the global neuron and workspace
theory, the attention schema theory, um. And um You
know, the evidence seems to require us to kind
of at least modify these theories slightly to account
for this, um, this empirical evidence. Yeah.
And finally, what kinds of clinical implications does this
research have, particularly for how we understand hallucinations and
conditions like schizophrenia?
Yeah, it has a lot of implications. And I
think that's one of the most exciting, uh, parts
of this, uh, is that, um, What this seems
to show is that Kind of we hallucinate all
the time, right? So, when, uh, so one kind
of way of thinking about this predictive processing, predictive
coding, Bayesian brain theory is that, uh, perception is
a controlled hallucination. And I can't remember who was
the first person to say this, but, uh, Anil
Seth has mentioned it a lot in, in talks,
etc. Uh, BUT the idea is this, that, uh,
our brains are hallucinating all the time based on
Uh, you know, our expectations, uh, uh, of what's
going to be in the world. It's the kind
of simulation that our brain makes of what it
thinks the world is. It's a, it's a controlled,
it's a hallucination. But it's, it's not just a
hall it's not, uh, so hallucinations can, you know,
take you far away from reality and make you
think things that don't exist and see things that
don't exist, etc. But this is a controlled hallucination,
meaning it's tethered to the world via the sensory
epithelia, right? So we're, we're tethered to the world
like a kind of needle on a record, right?
There's a connection between us. Um, BUT, uh, So
that's our reality and, and, and, you know, and
it's, and we share this hallucination, we call it
objectivity, we call it the world, right? There's intersubjectivity.
Um, BUT this process can, you know, go wrong.
So the, uh, the, the brain can kind of
lose, uh, touch with the sensory information coming in,
can become untethered from the world. In which case,
the hallucinate, you know, the system that creates this
world model is free to kind of do what
it likes, you know, certain constraints, uh, but it's
not tethered to reality and therefore, you can see
things that aren't there. If you've got a very
strong expectation that you're gonna say, see a face
in a crowd, uh, Uh, and if that hallucination
is strong enough, then you will probably see that
face in the crowd even though it's not there.
Um, SO. So yeah, so this applies to. Um,
ALL kinds of hallucinations. So in the case of,
uh, for example, Charles Bonnet syndrome or schizophrenia, um.
This, uh, uh, controlled hallucination has been, has become
uncontrolled, and therefore, you perceive what the brain is
making up. And while that might happen to all
of us on a certain level all the time,
uh, many of us who don't suffer from pathologies
are still tethered to the world. So even though
we might have an entertain a thought of X
or Y, that's a bit strange, uh, you know,
you quickly resolve that by Uh, testing it against
the world, what's coming in through the senses. Um,
SO, yeah, I think what this shows is that,
um, Hallucinations can occur on a kind of range.
Some hallucinations are necessary, you know, this controlled hallucination
that, that is what we are at the moment,
if that's true. It's necessary for us to survive
in this world to kind of, you know, persist,
but some uncontrolled hallucinations can lead us to, uh,
places like schizophrenia or, um, delusions, um, or other
kind of, uh, distortions of perception and reality. Yeah.
Great, so the book is again constructing experience, expectation,
and attention in perception. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Doctor
Clark, apart from the book, would you like to
tell people where they can find your work on
the internet?
Yeah. So they can find my work on ResearchNet
and academia.edu. And I don't currently have a personal
website. You can find information about me on the
University of West London website. Uh, THERE'S a list
of all my publications there. Um, YEAH, I, I,
I really should get a website set up, but
that's, that's something I need to do next. Yeah.
OK,
so thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. It's been a great
pleasure too. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Danaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Ia Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stinnik, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.